Install the Datadog Agent with Embedded OpenTelemetry Collector (#24539)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/agent/agent_with_custom_components.md

---
title: Use Custom OpenTelemetry Components with Datadog Agent
private: true
further_reading:
- link: "/opentelemetry/agent/install_agent_with_collector"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Use Custom OpenTelemetry Components with Datadog Agent"
---

This guide explains how to build a Datadog Agent image with additional OpenTelemetry (OTel) Components not included in the default Datadog Agent. To see a list of components already included in the Agent by default, see [Included components][1].

## Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need the following:

- [Docker][2] 
- Access to GitHub and the [Datadog Agent][3] source code.   
- The OpenTelemetry Components you plan to include in the Agent must be compatible with embedded OTel Collector version.

**Recommended**:

- Familiarity with [building a custom collector][4] and [OpenTelemetry Collector Builder][5] (OCB).  
- Basic understanding of the [Go](https://go.dev/) compilation process and [go modules](https://go.dev/blog/using-go-modules).

## Prepare the Dockerfile

> Download the Dockerfile template and prepare it to add the OTel components to be included in the Agent image:

Author: Great point--I am going to remove mention of preparing the file.

  - gomod: github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/receiver/prometheusreceiver v0.104.0
  - gomod: github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/receiver/receivercreator v0.104.0
  - gomod: github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/receiver/zipkinreceiver v0.104.0
# adding Kafka metrics receiver to collect Kafka metrics in OTLP format
  - gomod: github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/receiver/kafkametricsreceiver v0.104.0

connectors:
# You will see a list of connectors already included by Datadog 
# Add your desired connectors here
{{< /highlight >}}
1. Save your changes to the manifest file. 

## Build and push the Agent image

Build your custom Datadog Agent image and push it to a container registry.

1. Build the image with Docker:
   ```shell
   docker build . -t agent-otel --no-cache
   ```
2. Tag and push the image:
   ```shell
   docker tag agent-otel <IMAGE-NAME>/<IMAGE-TAG>
   docker push <IMAGE-NAME>/<IMAGE-TAG>
   ``` 
   Replace `<IMAGE-NAME>` and `<IMAGE-TAG>` with your image name and desired tag. If the target repository is not Docker Hub, you need to include the repository name. 

> 3. For a Helm Chart installation, set the image tag in your values file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. For a Helm chart installation, set the image tag in your values file:
```

Helm lowercases "chart"

   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
agents:
  image:
    repository: <YOUR-REPO>
    tag: <IMAGE-TAG>
    doNotCheckTag: true
   {{< /code-block >}}
   Replace `<YOUR-REPO>` and `<IMAGE-TAG>` with your repository name and desired image tag.
   

> <div class="alert alert-info">For complete installation instructions, see <a href="/opentelemetry/agent/install_agent_with_collector">Install the Datadog Agent with Embedded OpenTelemetry Collector</a>.</div>

Reviewer: This sentiment is also repeated at the end of the next section. Is that intentional?

## Test and validate

Create a sample configuration file and run your custom Agent to ensure everything is working correctly.

> 1. Create a sample OTel configuration file with the additional components.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a sample OpenTelemetry configuration file with the additional components.  
```

>    Here is an example with the additional [Kafka metrics receiver][7] configured:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The following example configures an additional [Kafka metrics receiver][7]:
```

Optional suggestion— I just feel like "here is" doesn't seem right with our style? But this is really just a feeling rather than a rule

             compute_top_level_by_span_kind: true
             peer_tags_aggregation: true
             compute_stats_by_span_kind: true
   
   service:
     pipelines:
       metrics:
         receivers: [otlp, datadog/connector,kafkametrics]
         processors: [batch]
         exporters: [datadog]
       traces:
         receivers: [otlp]
         processors: [batch]
         exporters: [datadog/connector]
       traces/2:
         receivers: [datadog/connector]
         processors: [batch]
         exporters: [datadog]
       logs:
         receivers: [otlp]
         processors: [batch]
         exporters: [datadog]
   ```
2. Run the Agent using the following Docker command.
   ```shell
   docker run -it \
     -e DD_API_KEY=XX \
     -e DD_SITE=datadoghq.com \
     -e DD_HOSTNAME=datadog \
     -v $(pwd)/config.yaml:/config.yaml \
     -p 4317:4317 \
     -p 4318:4318 \
     --entrypoint otel-agent \
     agent-otel --config /config.yaml
   ```
3. If the Agent starts, then the build process was successful. 

You can now use this new image to install the Agent. This enables Datadog monitoring capabilities along with the additional OpenTelemetry components you've added.

> For detailed instructions on installing and configuring the Agent with added OTel components, see the [Install the Datadog Agent with Embedded OpenTelemetry Collector][9] guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For detailed instructions on installing and configuring the Agent with added OpenTelemetry components, see the [Install the Datadog Agent with Embedded OpenTelemetry Collector][9] guide.
```

## Troubleshooting

> Here are some common issues you might encounter while building and running your custom Datadog Agent, along with their solutions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section discusses some common issues you might encounter while building and running your custom Datadog Agent, along with their solutions:
```

Same as the other suggestion, this is purely subjective!
